Imagine you just learned
that you had received an amazing inheritance
—something very special
that had been in your family for many years.
And the gift is very valuable.
How would you feel?
Actually, all of us
—everyone listening to this program—
have received such an inheritance.
It’s something that’s been passed down
from generation to generation
for thousands of years.
What is it?
It’s God’s Word, the Bible.
Through this precious gift,
we feel Jehovah’s love.
In what ways?
Let’s consider three:
We feel it when we learn how Jehovah
has preserved his Word
for thousands of years
so that we’d have it today,
we feel it in the message it conveys
from our loving heavenly Father,
and we feel it when we see
how our lives are improved
when we apply its teachings.
Let’s talk about the first:
Jehovah’s love is felt
in the way that he preserved his Word.
The Bible was written so long ago
on perishable materials,
and yet we have it today.
We have it on our phones and tablets,
and we have printed copies.
Consider what a miracle it is
that Jehovah had the Bible written down,
hand copied for centuries,
and yet it was
accurately preserved until our day.
How was the Bible written?
In a miraculous way.
Second Timothy 3:16 clearly states:
“All Scripture
is inspired of God and beneficial.”
Yes, Jehovah used his holy spirit
to convey his thoughts
to the minds and hearts of faithful men.
Some 40 writers were used.
Sixteen hundred years passed
until the Bible was completed
in about the year 98 C.E.
That’s more than 1,900 years ago.
So how is it that we have the Bible today?
It had to be hand copied.
Through the centuries,
scribes made copies of the text.
For example, the Masoretes
—a group of meticulous
Jewish scholars and copyists—
literally counted the number of words
and even the number of letters.
Why?
To make sure that they
copied the text accurately.
They wanted no errors to be introduced.
Thankfully, many ancient Bible manuscripts
have survived until today
—perhaps some 6,000 manuscripts
of the Hebrew Scriptures
and some 5,000
of the Christian Greek Scriptures.
By the 15th century,
the Bible had been hand copied
for hundreds of years.
But now that was about to change.
Let me show you what happened,
using a few examples
from our Bible collection
in Warwick, New York.
This is what’s often called a Paris Bible.
It was completed in France
during the latter part of the 13th century,
that is, somewhere between
the years 1250 and 1300.
It’s a complete Bible copied by hand.
Look at how beautiful it is!
Imagine the work involved
—a scribe sitting at a table
day after day carefully copying
so that someone could have a Bible like this.
Of course, few people
would ever have been able to own
a precious hand-copied Bible like this one.
But Jehovah had something better in mind.
So in the 15th century,
a man named Johannes Gutenberg
came up with an amazing idea.
In about the year 1455,
Gutenberg produced the first printed Bible.
He printed only about 180 copies.
That doesn’t sound like a lot today, does it?
But remember:
Up until that time,
every Bible had been hand copied.
So this was something truly amazing!
Here’s an original page
from one of those 180 Bibles
printed by Gutenberg.
It’s beautiful, isn’t it?
But this was just the beginning.
In time,
Gutenberg’s invention would allow
for thousands of copies of the Bible
to be printed
in a relatively short period of time.
In the years that followed,
printing presses gradually
were set up in various cities in Europe.
What were they able to produce?
In 1475,
Bernhard Richel produced
this Bible in Basel, Switzerland.
Look at the size of it.
And look at the beautiful printing.
It’s amazing what those early printers
were able to produce!
Although the Bible was now being printed,
there was still a problem.
What was it?
Few people would ever
have been able to afford a Bible like this.
Even though it was printed,
it was still very expensive.
This Bible was probably produced for a church
or for someone who was very wealthy.
But less than 20 years later,
there was another exciting development.
This is the Biblia Integra,
often called the Poor Man’s Bible.
It was printed
in Switzerland in the year 1491.
What do you notice about it?
It’s very small.
It’s thought to be the first
small-size printed Bible.
The man who produced this Bible
had a new idea.
He produced this Bible
to appeal to common churchgoers.
It wasn’t a Bible for a library or a church.
It was for personal use,
something that a person could own
and carry with him and read at anytime.
Why was this development so important?
Because in the next few decades,
the Bible would be translated
from the original languages
and printed in the vernacular,
or common languages,
of people across Europe.
For the first time,
it would be possible for people
to have a personal copy of the Bible
in their own language.
These significant developments
in Bible production
give us reason to believe
that our loving Father,
Jehovah, was involved.
He not only had preserved the Bible
but now he was ensuring that his gift
would be made available to all people.
Now let’s return to the studio.
Of course,
God’s enemies did not want people
to have Jehovah’s precious gift.
Thus, it’s not surprising
that many people have actively worked
to prevent others from having the Bible.
One scholar, Albert Barnes,
described it this way:
“No book has excited
so much opposition as this;
“but it has survived every attack
“which power, talent,
and eloquence have ever made on it.
“No army ever survived
so many battles as the Bible.”
Humans alone could never
have preserved the Bible
in the face of such strong opposition.
It’s a miracle that we have it today.
Clearly, we feel the love of Jehovah
when we see how he’s preserved the Bible
and made this precious gift available to all.
The Bible’s message is a second way
that we feel Jehovah’s love.
The Bible teaches us things
that we cannot learn anywhere else.
True, without the Bible,
we could understand that there is a Creator
and we could learn about his qualities
from the things he’s made.
But the Bible teaches us so much more.
In it,
Jehovah tells us his own personal name,
the purpose of life,
and what the future holds.
These are things
that we’d expect a loving Father
to share with his beloved children.
And what’s more, Jehovah invites us
to have a close relationship with him.
What a tender and loving Father!
The practical guidance for life
that the Bible contains
is a third way that we feel Jehovah’s love.
It’s a book
from the Creator that instructs us
how to live a happy and satisfying life.
It’s like our owner’s manual
from the Creator himself.
And how much we need it!
Jesus saw how much people
needed that guidance.
Matthew 9:36 says:
“On seeing the crowds, he felt pity for them,
“because they were skinned and thrown about
like sheep without a shepherd.”
That’s true today also.
People are so confused and lost.
They don’t know what to do.
They’re often guided simply
by their own thinking and desires.
As a result,
people end up in awful situations.
We need reliable guidance
to show us what’s right and what’s wrong
and to help us find the way to happiness.
And Jehovah has provided all of that
in his precious gift, the Bible.
Romans 15:4 says:
“For all the things
that were written beforehand
“were written for our instruction,
“so that through our endurance
“and through the comfort from the Scriptures
we might have hope.”
Even as our circumstances change,
the Bible continues
to be our manual for life.
Whether young or old, single or married,
the guidance in God’s Word always applies.
It always works.
As we reflect on all the ways
that the Bible is a unique gift,
what do we see or feel?
We feel the tremendous love
that Jehovah has for us
in giving us this gift.
He’s made sure that all
the information we need is inside it.
And he helps us to apply it in our life.
With what result?
Second Timothy 3:16, 17 says:
“All Scripture is inspired of God
“and beneficial for teaching, for reproving,
“for setting things straight,
“for disciplining in righteousness,
“so that the man of God
may be fully competent,
completely equipped for every good work.”
What have we learned
in this brief discussion?
Everything about the Bible
reflects Jehovah’s love
—the miraculous way he preserved it,
its message from a loving Father,
and its practical guidance on how to live.
Inheriting a precious gift
does not guarantee
that we will appreciate it.
Likewise, simply having a Bible
does not mean that we’ll benefit from it.
To benefit,
we need to read his Word,
the manual for life, every day.
As we read and study the Bible,
we feel the great love of its Author,
our wonderful God, Jehovah.
And the more we feel his love,
the more we’re moved to do
what he wants us to do.
That includes helping others
to receive and benefit
from this precious gift.
In this way,
we can help as many
as possible to experience
—yes, to really feel—
the love of God through the Bible.